
NITS 2025 in Tilburg

On the 6th of June 2025, Tilburg University hosted the 4th edition of the NITS workshop. The Network of Interdisciplinary Translation Studies (NITS) in the Netherlands and Flanders aims to bring researchers in Translation Studies and other related disciplines, such as Interpreting Studies, Machine Translation or Translation Technology together and discuss ongoing research and new ideas. Once a year the one-day NITS workshop facilitates this knowledge exchange and this year it was hosted in Tilburg University and organised by the ISMT group.

The NITS 2025 workshop gathered 40 people who actively participated in this one-day event. It featured 10 presentations and 13 posters as well as a panel discussion on the topic of education and LLMs and, for the first time in the NITS series, a master thesis award.

Following the opening by Dimitar Shterionov, Javad Pourmostafa gave the first presentation with title “Priming LLMs for Domain-Specific Machine Translation via In-context Learning and Quality Estimation” The presentation was based on the paper AMTA 2024 paper “Guiding In-Context Learning of LLMs through Quality Estimation for Machine Translation” by Javad Pourmostafa Roshan Sharami, Dimitar Shterionov, Pieter Spronck. 

Chiara Manna presented a poster outlining her work “Are We Paying Attention to Her? Investigating Gender Disambiguation and Attention in Machine Translation”, accepted for publication and to appear in the GITT 2025 proceedings. This poster preceded the presentation of her paper with the same title and authored by Chiara Manna, Afra Alishahi, Frédéric Blain, Eva Vanmassenhove at the GITT 2025 workshop (to be held later that month in Geneva, Switzerland).

In the second presentation session, Dimitar presented “Environmental Considerations for Digital Translation Technology” - a talk based on the same-name work by Dimitar Shterionov, Eva Vanmassenhove, Kristiina Taivalkoski-Shilov and Elena Murgolo to appear in The Routledge Handbook of Translation Technology and Society (Chapter 23).

In Presentation Session 3, Lisa Lepp presented her work on co-creation for Sign Language Machine Translation. This talk is based on Lisa’s recent publications “Co-Creation for Sign Language Processing and Translation Technology” by Lisa Lepp, Dimitar Shterionov, Mirella De Sisto and Grzegorz Chrupała and “User Involvement in the Research and Development Life Cycle of Sign Language Machine Translation Systems” by Lisa Lepp, Mirella De Sisto and Dimitar Shterionov. 

In the afternoon the panel discussion dedicated on education and Generative AI addressed important topics related to how to train translators (and in general students) in using LLMs. Chaired by Ana Guerberof-Arenas, the panel included 5 experts, Vincent Vandeghinste (INT), Lieve Maken (UGent), Bram Vanroy (KULeuven, INT), Aletta (Lettie) Dorst (Leiden University)  and our colleague Eva Vanmassenhove (Tilburg University). This panel facilitated a wide and constructive discussion. 

The next edition of the NITS workshop is to be held in Brussels, organised by the TRADITAL team at Université libre de Bruxelles.
